---
excerpt:	"**Maxim Romanov** is a *[Universitätsassistent](https://de.wikipedia.org/wiki/Universit%C3%A4tsassistent)  für Digital Humanities* at the [Institute for History, University of Vienna](http://ifg.univie.ac.at/en/about-us/staff/digital-humanities/maxim-romanov/). His dissertation (Near Eastern Studies, U of Michigan, 2013) explored how modern computational techniques of text analysis can be applied to the study of premodern Arabic historical sources. In particular, he studied “The History of Islam” (*Taʾrīḫ al-islām*), the largest of surviving biographical collections with over 30,000 biographies, written by the Damascene scholar al-Ḏahabī (d. 1348 CE). Currently, he continues his study of this biographical collection (*“The History of Islam”: An Essay in Digital Humanities*), which will serve as methodological and infrastructural foundation for the study of all surviving Arabic biographical collections and chronicles. Additionally, he is working on a series of foundational projects for the field of Arabic and Islamic studies, which include 1) a machine-readable corpus of classical Arabic texts (see, *OpenITI/OpenITI*), 2) a text-reuse project (see, *KITAB*), and 3) a gazetteer of the classical Islamic world (see, *al-Ṯurayyā*)."
header:
  overlay_image: /images/personal/at_work.jpg
  overlay_filter: rgba(0, 0, 0, 0.25)
  caption: "**Photo credit**: A picture taken by my seven-year-old daughter, Sasha Romanova (Arlington, MA, 2014)"
title:			"About"
author:		Maxim Romanov
layout:		single
author_profile: true
permalink: /about/
---

# curriculum vitæ

{% include cv.html %}


# Dissertation: *From Introduction*

My dissertation is a project in the digital humanities. Over the past few years “digital humanities” became an extremely overused buzzword, and one often gets a feeling that, as a Russian saying goes, only the lazy do not speak of themselves as digital humanists. For this reason, some clarifications are in order. The digital humanities still remains a vaguely defined field and DH studies range widely from theoretical inquiries into possible effects of technological developments on the humanities at large to the development and application of digital methods to traditional sources. While the prevailing majority of digital humanists prefer to contribute to the area of theoretical inquiries, this dissertation is primarily about studying traditional sources with non-traditional methods.

The initial plan was to write a dissertation on the history of “public preaching” (*waʿẓ*). My sociological background and my overall interest in Arabic biographical literature, which was firmly instilled in me by my Russian mentor [Professor Stanislav M. Prozorov](http://orientalstudies.ru/eng/index.php?option=com_personalities&Itemid=74&person=8), steered me toward the history of “public preaching” through the analysis of biographical collections. In order to study preachers as a social group it was necessary to study *all* their biographies. Unfortunately, conventional close reading was of little help and a different method was necessary. In order to understand how this social group fitted into Islamic society, it was necessary to know what Islamic society was, i.e. it was necessary to study *all* other biographies as well. Only this would allow to place preachers into a wider context of Islamic society as it is represented on the pages of biographical collections. This also required a different method.

Graduate students in our field often learn additional languages of the Islamicate world in order to advance their research. In order to solve my methodological issues I needed not a different language, but a different *kind* of language—a language that would allow me to work with texts in a radically different manner. It so happened that learning scripting languages—in my case `Python` and `R`—was the answer. These *formal* languages indeed allow one to read texts in a completely different way, no matter in what language they are, and no matter how long they are. They enhance and augment our ability to read by allowing us to work with practically unlimited volumes of text. They allowed me to pull together almost 30,000 biographies from al-Ḏahabī’s *Taʾrīḫ al-islām*, the largest biographical collection that became the backbone of my study, and start studying them as a whole.

Since digital methods have not yet entered the domain of Islamic studies, the first part of the dissertation offers a detailed explanation of “computational reading” that has been developed over the past two years. This method is built upon existing digital techniques and approaches that were picked from a variety of disciplines and adapted to the analysis of Arabic biographical collections. I fully realize that the reader might find the exposition of the method painfully technical, but since the method is essential for the entire study and largely unprecedented, its inner workings must be explained in sufficient details. Most importantly, I hope that this part will provide young scholars who are willing to step into the still uncharted terrain of digital methods of textual analysis with a desperately needed road map. Something that I, to my own misfortune, did not have.

The first part is also meant to be a step toward finding a viable approach for studying the vast digital corpus of classical Islamic texts which keeps on growing practically by the minute. If Islamicists do not find a way to deal with this big issue, eventually someone else will. In this light it is worth drawing attention to an experimental study conducted by a group of *information scientists*. Published in an American academic journal, this “computer study of the reliability of Arabic stories” attempts to evaluate the reliability of chains of transmitters (sing. *isnād*) in Prophetic reports (sing. *ḥadīṯ*) using contemporary information reliability theories. Although these scientists are far from producing anything as appealing to reading public as, for example, *Guns, Germs, and Steel*, there are no reasons to believe that our field will forever remain immune to those who might want to follow in the footsteps of Jared Diamond, a biologist-turn-historian.

The second part is on modeling. Extracted with digital methods, “big data” still need to be re-organized in some coherent manner in order to be useful for analysis. Modeling is a way to achieve this. As clearly defined systems of assumptions about different kinds of data and their interrelations, models are designed to provide explanations for complex processes. Thus, this part models big data extracted from al-Ḏahabī’s *Taʾrīḫ al-islām* to further our understanding of the social geography of the Islamic world and major social transformations that the Muslim community underwent in the course of its early history. Although largely a road map for further research, this part provides an important chronological, geographical and social background for the last part of the dissertation.

The third part is an application of the devised method to the study of Islamic preaching. It focuses on an exploratory overview of all major forms of Islamic preaching as they feature on the electronic pages of my corpus that covers about 700 years of Islamic history. Partially determined by the current state of the development of computational reading, this part studies the major forms of Islamic preaching from chronological, geographical and social perspectives that have been largely overlooked in the academic treatment of this subject. The choice of establishing the overview, instead of trying to find answers to particular historical questions, was deliberate. Working with big data makes it abundantly clear that there are too many unknowns and that asking specific questions without knowing what is and what is not in the data only leads to wrong answers. At this stage, “exploratory analysis” is much more crucial than specific inquiries. One of the major goals of this part is also to demonstrate how exactly computational reading can contribute to the studies of specific phenomena and practices in the pre-modern Islamic world.

The three parts of the dissertation build upon each other, but ultimately can be treated as separate studies.